# Client-Server Programming
## 2.1 Introduction to Sockets
**Lecture Summary**: In this lecture, we learned about client-server programming, and how two distributed Java applications can communicate with each other using sockets. Since each application in this scenario runs on a distinct Java Virtual Machine (JVM) process, we used the terms "application'', "JVM'' and "process'' interchangeably in the lecture. For JVM A and JVM B to communicate with each other, we assumed that JVM A plays the "client'' role and JVM B the "server'' role. To establish the connection, the main thread in JVM B first creates a ğš‚ğšğš›ğšŸğšğš›ğš‚ğš˜ğšŒğš”ğšğš (called ğšœğš˜ğšŒğš”ğšğš, say) which is initialized with a designated URL and port number. It then waits for client processes to connect to this socket by invoking the ğšœğš˜ğšŒğš”ğšğš.ğšŠğšŒğšŒğšğš™ğš() method, which returns an object of type ğš‚ğš˜ğšŒğš”ğšğš (called ğšœ, say) . The ğšœ.ğšğšğšğ™¸ğš—ğš™ğšğšğš‚ğšğš›ğšğšŠğš–() and ğšœ.ğšğšğšğ™¾ğšğšğš™ğšğšğš‚ğšğš›ğšğšŠğš–() methods can be invoked on this object to perform read and write operations via the socket, using the same APIs that you use for file I/O via streams.

Once JVM B has set up a server socket, JVM A can connect to it as a client by creating a ğš‚ğš˜ğšŒğš”ğšğš object with the appropriate parameters to identify JVM B's server port. As in the server case, the ğšğšğšğ™¸ğš—ğš™ğšğšğš‚ğšğš›ğšğšŠğš–() and ğšğšğšğ™¾ğšğšğš™ğšğšğš‚ğšğš›ğšğšŠğš–() methods can be invoked on this object to perform read and write operations. With this setup, JVM A and JVM B can communicate with each other by using read and write operations, which get implemented as messages that flow across the network. Client-server communication occurs at a lower level and scale than MapReduce, which implicitly accomplishes communication among large numbers of processes. Hence, client-server programming is typically used for building distributed applications with small numbers of processes.

Optional Reading:
1. Java tutorial titled Lesson: All About Sockets

## 2.2 Serialization and Deserialization
**Lecture Summary**: This lecture reviewed serialization and deserialization, which are essential concepts for all forms of data transfers in Java applications, including file I/O and communication in distributed applications. When communications are performed using input and output streams, as discussed in the previous lecture, the unit of data transfer is a sequence of bytes. Thus, it becomes important to serialize objects into bytes in the sender process, and to deserialize bytes into objects in the receiver process.

One approach to do this is via a custom approach, in which the programmer provides custom code to perform the serialization and deserialization. However, writing custom serializers and deserializers can become complicated when nested objects are involved, e.g., if object xx contains a field, f3f3, which points to object yy. In this case, the serialization of object xx by default also needs to include a serialization of object yy. Another approach is to use XML, since XML was designed to serve as a data interchange standard. There are many application frameworks that support conversion of application objects into XML objects, which is convenient because typical XML implementations in Java include built-in serializers and deserializers. However, the downside is that there can be a lot of metadata created when converting Java objects into XML, and that metadata can add to the size of the serialized data being communicated.

As a result, the default approach is to use a capability that has been present since the early days of Java, namely Java Serialization and Deserialization. This works by identifying classes that implement the ğš‚ğšğš›ğš’ğšŠğš•ğš’ğš£ğšŠğš‹ğš•ğš interface, and relying on a guarantee that such classes will have built-in serializers and deserializers, analogous to classes with built-in ğšğš˜ğš‚ğšğš›ğš’ğš—ğš() methods. In this situation, if object xx is an instance of a serializable class and its field f3f3 points to object yy, then object yy must also be an instance of a serializable class (otherwise an exception will be thrown when attempting to serialize object xx). An important benefit of this approach is that only one copy of each object is included in the serialization, even if there may be multiple references to the object, e.g., if fields f2f2 and f3f3 both point to object yy. Another benefit is that cycles in object references are handled intelligently, without getting into an infinite loop when following object references. Yet another important benefit is that this approach allows identification of fields that should be skipped during the serialization/deserialization steps because it may be unnecessary and inefficient to include them in the communication. Such fields are identified by declaring them as transient.

Finally, another approach that has been advocated for decades in the context of distributed object systems is to use an Interface Definition Language (IDL) to enable serialization and communication of objects across distributed processes. A recent example of using the IDL approach can be found in Google's Protocol Buffers framework. A notable benefit of this approach relative to Java serialization is that protocol buffers can support communication of objects across processes implemented in different languages, e.g., Java, C++, Python. The downside is that extra effort is required to enable the serialization (e.g., creating a .ğš™ğš›ğš˜ğšğš˜ file as an IDL, and including an extra compile step for the IDL in the build process), which is not required when using Java serialization for communication among Java processes.

Optional Reading:
1. Wikipedia article on Serialization

## 2.3 Remote Method Invocation
**Lecture Summary**: This lecture reviewed the concept of Remote Method Invocation (RMI), which extends the notion of method invocation in a sequential program to a distributed programming setting. As an example, let us consider a scenario in which a thread running on JVM A wants to invoke a method, ğšğš˜ğš˜(), on object xx located on JVM B. This can be accomplished using sockets and messages, but that approach would entail writing a lot of extra code for encoding and decoding the method call, its arguments, and its return value. In contrast, Java RMI provides a very convenient way to directly address this use case.

To enable RMI, we run an RMI client on JVM A and an RMI server on JVM B. Further, JVM A is set up to contain a stub object or proxy object for remote object xx located on JVM B. (In early Java RMI implementations, a skeleton object would also need to be allocated on the server side, JVM B, as a proxy for the shared object, but this is no longer necessary in modern implementations.) When a stub method is invoked, it transparently initiates a connection with the remote JVM containing the remote object, xx, serializes and communicates the method parameters to the remote JVM, receives the result of the method invocation, and deserializes the result into object yy (say) which is then passed on to the caller of method ğš¡.ğšğš˜ğš˜() as the result of the RMI call.

Thus, RMI takes care of a number of tedious details related to remote communication. However, this convenience comes with a few setup requirements as well. First, objects xx and yy must be serializable, because their values need to be communicated between JVMs AA and BB. Second, object xx must be included in the RMI registry, so that it can be accessed through a global name rather than a local object reference. The registry in turn assists in mapping from global names to references to local stub objects. In summary, a key advantage of RMI is that, once this setup in place, method invocations across distributed processes can be implemented almost as simply as standard method invocations.

Optional Reading:
1. Tutorial on Java RMI

2. Wikipedia article on Java remote method invocation

## 2.4 Multicast Sockets
**Lecture Summary**: In this lecture, we learned about multicast sockets, which are a generalization of the standard socket interface that we studied earlier. Standard sockets can be viewed as unicast communications, in which a message is sent from a source to a single destination. Broadcast communications represent a simple extension to unicast, in which a message can be sent efficiently to all nodes in the same local area network as the sender. In contrast, multicast sockets enable a sender to efficiently send the same message to a specified set of receivers on the Internet. This capability can be very useful for a number of applications, which include news feeds, video conferencing, and multi-player games. One reason why a 1:n1:n multicast socket is more efficient than nn 1:11:1 sockets is because Internet routers have built-in support for the multicast capability.

In recognition of this need, the Java platform includes support for a ğ™¼ğšğš•ğšğš’ğšŒğšŠğšœğšğš‚ğš˜ğšŒğš”ğšğš class, which can be used to enable a process to join a group associated with a given ğ™¼ğšğš•ğšğš’ğšŒğšŠğšœğšğš‚ğš˜ğšŒğš”ğšğš instance. A member of a group can send a message to all other processes in the group, and can also receive messages sent by other members. This is analogous to how members of a group-chat communicate with each other. Multicast messages are restricted to datagrams, which are usually limited in size to 64KB. Membership in the group can vary dynamically, i.e., processes can decide to join or leave a group associated with a ğ™¼ğšğš•ğšğš’ğšŒğšŠğšœğšğš‚ğš˜ğšŒğš”ğšğš instance as they choose. Further, just as with group-chats, a process can be a member of multiple groups.

Optional Reading:
1. Documentation on MulticastSocket class

2. Wikipedia article on Multicast

## 2.5 Publish-Subscribe Pattern
**Lecture Summary**: We studied the publish-subscribe pattern, which represents a further generalization of the multicast concept. In this pattern, publisher processes add messages to designated topics, and subscriber processes receive those messages by registering on the topics that they are interested in. A key advantage of this approach is that publishers need not be aware of which processes are the subscribers, and vice versa. Another advantage is that it lends itself to very efficient implementations because it can enable a number of communication optimizations, which include batching and topic partitioning across broker nodes. Yet another advantage is improved reliability, because broker nodes can replicate messages in a topic, so that if one node hosting a topic fails, the entire publish-subscribe system can continue execution with another node that contains a copy of all messages in that topic.

We also studied how publish-subscribe patterns can be implemented in Java by using APIs available in the open-source Apache Kafka project. To become a publisher, a process simply needs to create a KafkaProducerKafkaProducer object, and use it to perform send()send() operations to designated topics. Likewise, to become a consumer, a process needs to create a KafkaConsumerKafkaConsumer object, which can then be used to subscribe to topics of interest. The consumer then performs repeated poll()poll() operations, each of which returns a batch of messages from the requested topics. Kafka is commonly used as to produce input for, or receive output from, MapReduce systems such as Hadoop or Spark. By storing Kafka messages as key-value pairs, data analytics applications written using MapReduce programming models can seamlessly interface with Kafka. A common use case for Kafka is to structure messages in a topic to be as key-value pairs, so that they can be conveniently used as inputs to, or outputs from, data analytics applications written in Hadoop or Spark. Each key-value message also generally includes an offset which represents the index of the message in the topic. In summary, publish-subscribe is a higher-level pattern than communicating via sockets, which is both convenient and efficient to use in situations where producers and consumers of information are set up to communicate via message groups (topics).

Optional Reading:
1. Wikipedia article on the Publish-Subscribe pattern

2. Wikipedia article on the Apache Kafka project
